Two of the easiest ways to save money on EC2 instances is
by reserving compute capacity in advance and by bidding on Spot Instances.
Spot Instances are AWS excess compute capacity
made available for sale to the public at a steep discount.
It can be reclaimed at anytime,
so it should be used for
your non-essential computing functions that don't require 100 percent availability,
like stateless, non-production workloads, batch jobs,
Sandbox Environments, or really any
application where some short notice downtime is acceptable.
Reserved instances provide up to 75 percent discount when compared to
on-demand pricing when you commit to purchasing
instances in a particular availability zone upfront.
Instances can be reserved for a period of
one or three years and come in two classes: Convertible and Standard.
Convertible Reserved Instances cost a bit more for the flexibility of
being able to exchange them for convertible instances of equal or lesser value later.
Standard Reserved Instances cannot be exchanged.
Once you buy those, they're yours.
You can also purchase
Convertible Reserved Instances and the Convertible Reserved Instance Marketplace.
I'll provide a link for more information in that in the further research link below.
Spot Instances are AWS unused EC2 capacity.
That AWS sells at up to 90 percent discount when compared to on-demand pricing.
Spot Instances are up for sale for an hourly price on the Spot market,
and the market price fluctuates based on availability and demand.
You set your Spot price and your spot instance will run whenever capacity is
available and the maximum price per hour for your request exceeds the Spot price.
Spot Instances are good for fault tolerance,
stateless, and flexible applications.
Some good examples are containerized workloads,
test and dev workloads,
web servers, and batch processes.
Spot Instances have one major drawback,
AWS can reclaim the capacity allocated to your Spot Instance with two minutes of notice.
At the two-minute mark,
your Instance will be terminated.
If you can be flexible about when your applications run,
and if they can be interrupted,
Spot Instances are a great cost-effective choice.
Lastly, AWS offers Dedicated Instances and Dedicated Hosts.
Some companies have a requirement that their application is not run on shared servers.
So AWS offers the option of Dedicated Hosts,
Instances launched on physical servers that are dedicated for your use.
Dedicated Instances are run in a VPC on hardware that is dedicated to a single customer.